---
layout: post
title: "GRUB Error 17"
date: 2009-09-19
---

<div class="post-body">
<p>Almost exactly a year earlier, I had been <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20190906053746/http://raywoodcockslatest.blogspot.com/search?q=%22error+17%22">wrestling with Error 17</a> in the GRUB bootloader in Ubuntu, and now it was back. (Back then, I had been running Ubuntu 8.04; now I was running 9.04.) One difference: back then, it seemed to have been accompanied by additional information, but this time I was only getting the bald "Error 17" report, with no other text.

I didn't know why I was getting this error. I hadn't changed anything. All I could imagine (based on a <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20190906053746/http://www.howtogeek.com/howto/ubuntu/reinstall-ubuntu-grub-bootloader-after-windows-wipes-it-out/">HowToGeek</a> article) was that possibly I had installed some Windows XP security updates since my previous reboot, and maybe one of them had messed up GRUB.

Following the advice in that HowToGeek article, I rebooted with the Ubuntu 9.04 Live CD. In Terminal (i.e., Ubuntu's Applications &gt; Accessories &gt; Terminal), I typed "sudo grub" to get into the GRUB prompt. The instructions assumed that I had installed GRUB into the first partition on the first hard drive (i.e., hd0,0). I wasn't sure if that was correct, and I wasn't sure how to find out. The notes from my previous year's go-round (above) seemed to say that I could use "find /boot/grub/stage1" for this purpose. But it seemed likely that, from the Live CD, that would just tell me where GRUB's Stage 1 files were (or something like that) on the CD, not on the hard drive. It seemed that I would have to gain access to the Ubuntu boot partition in order for that command to work.

So I started with Nautilus (i.e., Ubuntu's Places &gt; Computer menu pick, which opens up the Nautilus program that Ubuntu calls File Browser). There, I saw icons for my various partitions, including one labeled "Mass Storage Drive." When I double-clicked on that, I got "Unable to mount location. Can't mount drive." Ah, so this suggested a different theory. Maybe GRUB wasn't damaged after all. Maybe the problem was that the boot drive was screwed up.

To learn more about that, I went into GParted (i.e., System &gt; Administration &gt; Partition Editor) and looked at my partitions. And this was truly remarkable. In place of the Ubuntu and WinXP partitions that I had installed on my first hard drive, there was now . . . nothing! The Ubuntu and WinXP partitions were completely gone, wiped out. Instead, I just had a disk consisting of one big unallocated space. Well, that would certainly explain why there was no GRUB boot menu.

How could that happen? I tried <a href="//web.archive.org/web/20190906053746/https://www.google.com/search?hl=en&amp;q=partition+%22completely+gone%22+unallocated+%22dual+boot%22+ubuntu+windows&amp;sourceid=navclient-ff&amp;rlz=1B3GGGL_enUS291US291&amp;ie=UTF-8">a Google search</a>, but that didn't point out any obvious explanations. I tried to recall what had happened when I shut down the machine the previous day. But there didn't seem to have been anything remarkable. Nothing stood out in my mind particularly. I would usually shut down that computer at night, but maybe this time I had left it running, and some mysterious virus had done this overnight? I wasn't sure.

So, OK, it was time to start over. Fortunately, I had made Acronis True Image 11 backups of the program partitions onto another drive, so I rebooted from the Acronis CD and restored those. But then - what's this? The WinXP backup was there, but it looked like I had not done an Ubuntu backup. This was possibly because the Ubuntu installation on that machine had given me endless problems; apparently I had intended to start over. So, OK, that's <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20190906053746/http://raywoodcockslatest.blogspot.com/2009/09/ubuntu-910-installation-karmic-koala.html">exactly what I did</a>. Not at this point - for now, I had a hard drive with only Windows XP installed - but later.

Unfortunately, this did not solve the problem. Even with the Ubuntu partition completely gone, I still got GRUB Error 17 when I rebooted. GParted on the Live CD was telling me that no, I actually had not succeeded in restoring WinXP to that empty drive just now, despite the opinion of Acronis to the contrary. I rebooted with the WinXP installation CD, and it concurred: there was no Windows installation. I tried again with Acronis, this time trying to restore only the program partition, not the MBR. Also, this time I indicated that the restored partition was a primary partition, not active, as I had done on the previous try.  While I was still in Acronis, I checked, and sure enough, the drive did now definitely have a Windows XP partition as its only formatted partition.  I rebooted, and this time XP ran normally.  No more Ubuntu (until I got around to reinstalling it); no more GRUB Error 17.</p>
<div style="clear: both;"></div>
</div>

---
### Comments
